The Zeta Programming Language
=============================

This is an implementation of a Virtual Machine (VM) for the zeta programming
language I'm working on in my spare time. Zeta draws inspiration from LISP,
Smalltalk, ML, Python, JavaScript and C. The language is currently at the early
prototype stage, meaning the syntax and semantics are likely to change a lot
in the coming months. At the moment, this platform and language is mostly of
interest to tinkerers and those with a special interest in compilers or
language design.

## Quickstart

Requirements:

- A C compiler

- GNU make

- A POSIX compliant OS (Linux or Mac OS)

To built the zeta VM, go to the source directory and run `make`

Tests can then by running the `make test` command

A read-eval-print loop (shell) can be started by running the `./zeta` binary

## Language Design

Planned features of the zeta programming language include:

- Dynamic typing

- Dynamically extensible objects with prototypal inheritance, as in JavaScript

- Garbage collection

- A user-extensible grammar, giving programmers the ability to define new syntactic constructs

- Operator overloading, to allow defining new types that behave like native types

- No distinction between statements and expression, everything is an expression, as in LISP

- Functional constructs such as map and foreach

- A module system

- An easy to use canvas library to render simple 2D graphics

- The ability to suspend and resume running programs

## Zeta Core Language Syntax

The syntax of the Zeta programming language is not finalized. The language is
designed to be easy to parse (no backtracking or far away lookup), relatively
concise, easy to read and familiar-seeming to most experienced programmers.
In Zeta, every syntactic construct is an expression which has a value (although
that value may have no specific meaning in some cases).

The Zeta grammar will be extensible. The Zeta core language itself (without
extensions), is going to be kept intentionally simple and minimalistic.
Features such as regular expressions, switch statements, pattern matching and
template strings will be implemented as grammar extension in libraries, and
not part of the core language. The advantage here is that the core VM will not
need to know anything about things such as regular expressions, and multiple
competing regular expression packages can be implemented for Zeta.

Here is an example snippet of what Zeta code might look like

```
// Load the IO module
io = import('io');

io.println('This is a small Zeta script');

// Fibonacci function
fib = fun (n) if n < 1 then n else fib(n-1) + fib(n-1)

/* Compute the meaning of life and print out the answer */
io.println(fib(42))

foo = fun ()
{
    io.println('it is also possible to execute expressions in sequence')
    io.println('inside blocks with curly braces')
    io.println('semicolons can be used in ambiguous cases');

    // Local variables are declared by directly assignong to them
    x = 7 + 1

    /*
    The variable 'unit' refers to this script or code unit, the scope of
    this unit is an object. To assign to the global scope, we need to do
    the following:
    */
    unit.y = 3

    // Global variables are resolved as you would expect, here z is 3.
    z = y

    // This creates a local y which is equal to 4, but the global y remains 3
    y = y + 1

    // We can also create anonymous closures
    bar = fun () x

    // This function returns the closure bar, the last expression we
    // have evaluated
}

// Make the fib and foo functions available to other modules
exports.fib = fib;
exports.foo = foo;
```

Everything is still in flux, so comments are welcome.

## Zeta VM

I've chosen to implement the VM core in pure C (not C++), for the following reasons:

- To make low-level details explicit (for instance, the layout of hosted objects in memory)

- To avoid hidden sources of overhead

- To maximize portability. GCC is available on almost every platform in existence.

An important goal of the Zeta VM is that it should be easy to build on both
Mac and Linux with minimal dependencies. It shouldn't require any special libraries
to run out of the box. You may need to install libraries to use graphical capabilities
and such, but the core VM will built with only a C compiler installed on your
machine.

The zeta implementation will be largely [self-hosted](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Self-hosting).
The core VM will implement an interpreter in C, but the garbage collector and zeta JIT
compiler will be written in the zeta language itself.

A custom x86 assembler and backend will be built for the JIT compiler, as was done
for the [Higgs](https://github.com/higgsjs/Higgs) VM. This will allow self-modifying
code to be generated by the JIT. The x86 backend will be implemented in the zeta language as well.

